In today's lecture, we're going to
be looking at time series and
date functionality in pandas.
Manipulating dates and
times is quite flexible in pandas and
thus allows us to conduct more
analysis such as time series analysis,
which we're going to talk about soon.
Actually, pandas was originally created
by Wes McKinney to handle date and
time data when he worked as
a consultant for hedge funds.
So it's quite robust in this matter.
Let's bring in pandas and numpy as usual.
All right,
pandas has four main time related classes.
Timestamp, DatetimeIndex,
Period, and PeriodIndex.
First, let's look at timestamp.
It represents a single timestamp and
associates values with points in time.
For instance, let's create a timestamp
with a string 9/1/2019 at 10:05 AM.
And here we have our timestamp.
Timestamp is interchangeable with
Python's datetime in most cases.
So we just do pd.Timestamp and
pass in the string.
We can also create a timestamp by passing
multiple parameters such as year,
month, hour, date, minutes, separately.
So pd.Timestamp and
we just pass these in order.
Timestamp also has some useful attributes,
such as isoweekday(),
which shows the weekday of the timestamp.
Note that 1 represents Monday and
7 represents Sunday.
So we create our new timestamp and
then we just say isoweekday().
And this is actually quite commonly
done to just get a simple numeric value.
You can find extract the specific year,
month, day, hour,
etc from a timestamp as well.
So we can create some new timestamp and
as we're using it just do .second and see
how many seconds there were, who are the
second parameter space rather for that.
So suppose we weren't interested
in a specific point in time and
instead we wanted a span of time.
This is where the Period
class comes into play.
Period represents a single time span,
such as a specific day or month.
So here let's create a period that's
just for the month January 2016.
So we do pd.Period('1/2016').
You'll notice that when we print out the
granularity of the period is M for month,
since this was the finest grained
piece of data that we provided.
Here's an example of a period
that's March 5th, 2016.
So we just do pd.Period,
pass in our date, and
we'll see that it's got
the granularity of day.
Period objects represent the full
time span that you specify.
So arithmetic on period is very easy and
intuitive.
For instance, if we just want to find
out 5 months after January 2016,
we simply plus 5 to it.
So pd.Period('1/2016') add 5,
and here we go.
From the result,
you'll see that we get June 2016.
If we want to find out two days before
March 5th, 2016, we simply subtract 2.
So create our new period and subtract 2.
The key here is that
the period object encapsulates
the granularity for arithmetic.
The index of a timestamp is a DatetimeIndex.
And let's look at a quick example because
this is really quite handy when you start
to deal with time series data.
First, let's create our example series t1.
We'll use the timestamp of September 1st,
2nd, and 3rd of 2016.
When we look at the series, each
Timestamp is the index that has a value
associated with it,
in this case, a, b, and c.
So here we do pd.Series,
we're going to give a list, abc, so
these are our data values.
And then our indexes and array next to it.
And we're going to do
create three Timestamps.
One is going to be the first day of
September then the second day of September
then the third day.
Let's take a look at what
this creates as a series.
So looking at the type
of our series index,
we're going to see that
it's a DatetimeIndex.
So we do type(t1.index).
Remember the d-type above is referring
to the data values in the series
not the index.
So here we can see that
the index is a DatetimeIndex.
So similarly, we can create
a period-based index as well,
which I think is really quite nice.
So we'll create some new series, def, and
we'll just create our period
objects in that list for the index.
And so looking at the type of ts2.index,
we'll see that it's a PeriodIndex.
Now, let's look into how
to convert to Datetime.
Suppose we have a list of dates of strings
and we want to create a new dataframe.
So I'm going to try a bunch
of different date format.
So here I'll say d1 = ['2 June 2013',
which is common August 29,
2014', that's also common.
'2015-06-26'.
And then '7/12/16'].
So if you take a human entered data,
this is what you're going to get.
Or if you take data that comes
from multiple different systems.
Let's say you're joining dataframes and
you're bringing in date
fields from multiple places.
And now let's just create
some random data here.
So we'll just create a new dataframe,
just with some random integers.
And then we're going to set our
index to d1 and some columns.
And let's take a look at that.
So using pandas to_datetime,
pandas will try and
convert these Datetime and
put them into a standard format.
because this is ugly and
horrible to deal with.
So pandas has these nice
built-in to_datetime to try and
figure out the format for us.
So let's take a look with ts3.
So to_datetime also() has options
to change the date parse order.
For example, we can pass in the argument
dayfirst = True to parse the European
date if we think that our data
is going to be in that format.
So here I'll take '4.7.12'.
You see there's some ambiguity here,
what's month and what's day.
And well, even what's year, I guess,
it could be an ambiguity here.
So we could just say dayfirst=True.
So Timedeltas are differences in times.
And this is not the same as a period,
but it may be it feels like it at first,
but it's conceptually very similar.
So for instance if we want to take
the difference between September 3rd and
September 1st,
we get a Timedelta of two days.
So we can actually just take
a Timestamp  - another Timestamp.
And the resulting object is a Timedelta
and here you see it says that it's 2 days.
It's printed out a nice
human parseable thing.
But the object itself is
capturing that it's these 2 days.
So we can also do something like
find what the date and time is for
12 days and
three hours past September 2nd at 8:10 AM.
So we don't have to have
these round number.
So here we've taken a Timestamp
which is a very precise.
It's 8:10AM.
And here we just want to add two at
a Timedelta of 12 days and 3 hours.
And we can see what that time is.
So offset is similar to timedelta, but it
follows specific calendar duration rules.
Offset allows flexibility in
terms of types of time intervals.
Besides hour, day, week, month, etc.,
it also has things like business day,
and end of month, semi month begin, etc.
So very non-traditional time series, but
things that we would use
in business all the time.
So let's create a timestamp,
and see what day it is.
So we'll create some new Timestamp and
we'll see which weekday it is and
this is now the sixth,
so this is from the ISO.
So now we can add the timestamp
with a week ahead.
So we can take that Timestamp and
then we can say we want to
add an offset of one week.
So now let's try and
do this to month end.
And this would give us
the last day of September.
So here we can take a Timestamp and
then we want to add some offset
to get to the month end.
And so
now we actually have the month end date.
Okay, next let's look at a few tricks for
working with dates in a DataFrame.
Suppose we want to look
at nine measurements,
taken bi-weekly, every Sunday,
starting in October 2016.
Using date_range,
we can create a DatetimeIndex.
In date_range, we have to either
specify the start or the end date.
If it's not explicitly specified,
by default,
the data is considered the start date.
So then we have to take the specified
number of periods, and a frequency.
So here I'm going to set it to '2W-
SUN' which means bi-weekly on Sunday.
So like regex, there's sort of a mini
language to describe these periods.
And the pandas documentation, if you get
really dealing with time series data,
we're not going to in this course.
But if you end up dealing
a lot with time series data,
the pandas documentation is phenomenal.
So here we'll do dates = pd.date_range.
We set our start,
we say we want 9 periods.
And this is our frequency, and
then look at the DatetimeIndex
that comes out of that.
And we see that it's well set up for it.
So there's many other frequencies
that you can specify.
For example,
one common one is the business day.
And so here we just set the date_range.
We give it the date, we set the periods,
and then we say freq= 'B'.
Another common one is quarterly but
setting the start of the quarter
in a specific month like June.
So here we just set the periods to 12 and
then our freq= 'QS- JUN'.
Now, let's go back to our weekly on
Sunday example and create a DataFrame
using these dates, and some random data,
and see what we can do with it.
So dates = pd.date_range.
We're going to set the periods=9, and
the frequency equal to two
weeks starting on Sunday.
And now we're just going to
fill in to that some data.
So I'm going to create
a column called Count 1.
We'll make these some random numbers and
a cumulative sum of these.
And then Count 2 as well,
and set the index to dates.
Okay, so there's our dummy data.
So first, we can check what day
of the week a specific date is.
For example, here we can see that all
of the dates in our index are on a Sunday.
Which matches the frequency that we set.
So if we say df.index.weekday_name,
we see, they all come back on a Sunday.
If we had more variable dates as our
index, we would see the variation here.
We can also use the diff() to find
the difference between each date's value.
And this is just on the data frame itself,
df.diff().
Suppose we want to know what the mean
count is for each month in our DataFrame.
We can do this using resample.
Converting from a higher frequency from
a lower frequency is called down sampling.
And we'll talk about this in a moment in a
little bit more detail in another lecture.
So df.resample to monthly, and
let's look at the the mean values.
And so here we've collapsed
the dates on a monthly cadence.
So we've got this kind of date
perspective on how to do that.
We haven't had to write our own group
by and figure it all out ourselves.
We're able to use the resampling built-in.
Now, let's talk about datetime
indexing and slicing,
which is a wonderful feature
of the pandas DataFrame.
For instance, we can use partial string
indexing and the key here is that
it's actually based on string indexing
to find values from a particular year.
So if we're just interested in 2017,
we can say df['2017'] and
that returns to us all the values
that were from that year.
Or we could do it from a particular month.
So df['2016-12'].
So remember, these are all string
values that were matching on.
We can even slice on a range of dates.
For example, here we might want
the values from December 2016 onwards.
So we can just say we want
df['2016-12':] onwards.
Okay, so that's how the date
functionality in pandas works.
It's kind of a whirlwind
tour we've done here.
We're going to talk about
resampling in another lecture.
And that's maybe going to be a little
bit more clear how we use this.
Again, if you have to deal
with a lot of datetime data,
this lecture will become important to
come back to to refresh and understand.
And also the functionality of pandas
with respect to datetime is really
quite phenomenal and the documentation
describes it in more detail.